third-party/thrift/src/thrift/doc/features/patch/patch.md, before:

---
state: experimental
---

# Patch

:::note

Thrift Patch is an experimental feature that is only implemented in C++.

:::

## Overview

How mutations for Thrift values are represented, manipulated, and applied. It can be considered a [diff](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diff) between two Thrift values.

## Motivation

1. Reduce network bandwidth.
    1. Considering that we have a service which stores thrift objects in database. When a client wants to modify the object, they can just send the Patch instead of the whole object to reduce network bandwidth.
    2. This is how Patch is used in Rodos and CPEntity.
2. Reduce storage overhead.
    1. When storing multiple similar thrift objects in database, we can store one root object, and patches to generate other objects from the root object.
    2. In addition, you might want to know how stored thrift objects are changed over time. You can store the changesets as patches.
    3. This is how Patch is used in Control Plane.

## Enable Patch

Use `thrift_patch_library` buck build rule to enable Patch. It takes
three arguments

| Argument            | Description                                             | Example                            |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------- |
| thrift_library_name | The name of thrift_library that contains the srcs.      | "my_rule"                          |
| thrift_library_srcs | The thrift source files that we want to generate Patch. | ["foo.thrift", "bar.thrift"]       |
| thrift_library_deps | The build rules that patch depends on.                  | ["//path/to/foo", "//path/to/bar"] |

### Example

In TARGETS, for

```
thrift_library(
  name = "foo",
  languages = ['cpp2'],
  srcs = {"foo.thrift": []},
  deps = ["//path/to/bar"]
)
```

Add the following build rule to build patch target

```
thrift_patch_library(
  thrift_library_name = "foo",
  thrift_library_srcs = ["foo.thrift"],
  thrift_library_deps = ["//path/to/bar"],
)
```

So that this can be used later in C++

```
// MyService.cpp
#include "path/to/gen-cpp2/foo_patch_types.h"

auto createPatch() {
  apache::thrift::op::patch_type<Foo> patch;
  patch.patch<ident::message>() += "suffix";
  return patch;
}
```

Dependencies can be included automatically via autodeps.

### Dynamic Patch

There are 2 representations of a Patch — Static Patch and Dynamic Patch. Both
have identical wire format, though they have different requirements and provide
different APIs. In general, Static Patch is preferred unless you can not include
the generated thrift header.

- Static Patch, or Schema-full Patch, is generated from Thrift codegen and has
  1:1 mapping to Thrift type.
  - Pros: More user-friendly APIs (e.g., be able to modify patch based on field
    name, user can’t generate invalid patch).
  - Cons: Requires thrift file to be available (e.g.,
    `<thrift_file>_patch_types.h` must be included in C++).
    You need to recursively enable to all Thrift file dependencies.
- Dynamic Patch, or Schema-less Patch, is a schema-less representation of static
  patch that is consumed with dynamic type `protocol::Object`.
  - Pros: Can be used without thrift file.
  - Cons: Less user-friendly APIs.

### Deprecated workflow

There is also a deprecated workflow which you can enable Patch via
`@patch.GeneratePatch` annotation.

When this annotation is used, the corresponding Patch struct will be generated directly in the original thrift file.
This workflow is deprecated and it should not be used for new files.

## C++ Static Patch

### Struct Patch

Considering the following thrift struct.

```
// In thrift file
struct MyStruct {
  1: optional string field;
};
```

Then you can use `MyStructPatch` to access the underlying [StructPatch](../../../ref/cpp/class/apache/thrift/op/detail/StructPatch). e.g.,

```
// In C++ file
namespace op = apache::thrift::op;
namespace ident = apache::thrift::ident;

MyStruct s;
s.field() = "hi";

MyStructPatch patch;
op::StringPatch& stringPatch = patch.patch<ident::field>();
stringPatch.prepend("(");
stringPatch.append(")");
patch.apply(s);
EXPECT_EQ(s.field(), "(hi)");
```

Here `patch.patch<ident::field>()` is a [StringPatch](../../../ref/cpp/class/apache/thrift/op/detail/StringPatch). It’s worth noting that `patch` method will ensure the existence of the field. If field doesn’t exist, it will be set to intrinsic default first, e.g.,

```
s.clear();
patch.apply(s);
EXPECT_TRUE(s.field().has_value());
EXPECT_EQ(s.field(), "()");
```

If you don’t want to patch when the field doesn’t exist, you **should** use `patchIfSet` method instead.
Besides patching fields, you can also use `patch` to modify the whole struct. e.g.,

```
patch.clear();
patch.apply(s);
EXPECT_FALSE(s.field().has_value());
```

### Merge

All Patches have `merge` method, it’s guaranteed that the following code.

```
patch1.apply(v);
patch2.apply(v);
```

is equivalent to

```
patch1.merge(patch2);
patch1.apply(v);
```

### Patch as Thrift Struct

The Patch itself is a thrift struct that can be included in another thrift struct, e.g.

```
// In Foo.thrift
@patch.GeneratePatch
struct MyStruct {
  1: optional string field;
};

// In Patches.thrift
include "Foo.thrift"
struct Patches {
  1: Foo.MyStructPatch patch;
}
```

`Patches` works as a normal thrift structure which you can serialize/deserialize.

NOTE: Due to implementation limitation, you cannot include MyStructPatch in the same file — you have to include it in another file. In addition, you cannot use `@GeneratePatch` for struct that contains another Patch.

### Value Patches

Besides StringPatch, there are [other types of Patch](../../../cpp_api_toc). One example would be [MapPatch](../../../ref/cpp/class/apache/thrift/op/detail/MapPatch). Consider the following thrift struct.


```
// In thrift file
struct MyMapStruct {
  2: map<i64, string> nested;
};
```

You can patch elements by key, e.g.,

```
MyMapStructPatch patch;
auto &stringPatch = patch.patch<ident::nested>().patchByKey(42);
stringPatch.prepend("(");
stringPatch.append(")");

MyMapStruct s;
s.nested[42] = "hi";
patch.apply(s);
EXPECT_EQ(s.nested[42], "(hi)");
```

### Read patch's content

`Patch::customVisitor(Visitor)` can be used to inspect Patch. This API uses the Visitor pattern to describe how Patch is applied. For each operation that will be performed by the patch, the corresponding method (that matches the write API) will be invoked.

For example, let's assume you have the following thrift struct:

    struct MyClass {
      1: string foo;
      2: bool bar;
    }

and then you created the following patch:

    MyClassPatch patch;
    patch.patch<ident::bar>().invert();
    patch.patch<ident::bar>().invert();
    patch.patch<ident::foo>().append("_");

`patch.customVisit(v)` will invoke the following methods

    v.ensure<ident::foo>();
    v.ensure<ident::bar>();
    v.patchIfSet<ident::foo>(StringPatch::createAppend("_"));
    v.patchIfSet<ident::bar>(BoolPatch{});  // no-op since inverted twice

### Type alias for Patch type

You can get Patch type from original type, vice versa. e.g.,

```
static_assert(std::is_same_v<apache::thrift::op::patch_type<MyStruct>, MyStructPatch>);
static_assert(std::is_same_v<MyStruct, MyStructPatch::value_type>);
```

## C++ Dynamic Patch

If you can not include the generated thrift header, you can still serialize any abritrary patch to `protocol::Object` and apply it. Here is an example how to apply the dynamic patch:

```
MyStruct s;
s.field() = "hi";

MyStructPatch patch;
op::StringPatch& stringPatch = patch.patch<ident::field>();
stringPatch.prepend("(");
stringPatch.append(")");

protocol::Object dynamicStruct = apache::thrift::protocol::toObject(s);
protocol::Object dynamicPatch = apache::thrift::protocol::toObject(patch);
protocol::applyPatch(dynamicPatch, dynamicStruct);

EXPECT_EQ(dynamicStruct[FieldId{1}].as_string(), "(hi)");

```

You can find all dynamic patch APIs [here](../../../ref/cpp/file/thrift/lib/cpp2/protocol/Patch.h).

Commit message:

Allow users to customize Patch's thrift_library
Summary:
This diff forwarded extra arguments in `thrift_patch_library` to its internal `thrift_library`.

A side effect is that users now need to specify `languages`, though I felt it's better to be more strict for now.

# Motivation

1. There are use cases to use Patch in rust. We need to customize `languages`.
2. There are use cases to put Patch in any. We need to add "any" to `thrift_cpp2_options`.

Reviewed By: thedavekwon

Differential Revision: D52683941

fbshipit-source-id: 90019e8a8a9316b01f7446e083fef4eb8c3ac706

third-party/thrift/src/thrift/doc/features/patch/patch.md, after:

---
state: experimental
---

# Patch

:::note

Thrift Patch is an experimental feature that is only implemented in C++.

:::

## Overview

How mutations for Thrift values are represented, manipulated, and applied. It can be considered a [diff](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diff) between two Thrift values.

## Motivation

1. Reduce network bandwidth.
    1. Considering that we have a service which stores thrift objects in database. When a client wants to modify the object, they can just send the Patch instead of the whole object to reduce network bandwidth.
    2. This is how Patch is used in Rodos and CPEntity.
2. Reduce storage overhead.
    1. When storing multiple similar thrift objects in database, we can store one root object, and patches to generate other objects from the root object.
    2. In addition, you might want to know how stored thrift objects are changed over time. You can store the changesets as patches.
    3. This is how Patch is used in Control Plane.

## Enable Patch

Use `thrift_patch_library` buck build rule to enable Patch. Internally, it will
create a `thrift_library` buile rule that contains the patch structs in thrift
file `[thrift_file_name]_patch.thrift`. It takes the following arguments

| Argument            | Description                                             | Example                            |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------- |
| thrift_library_name | The name of thrift_library that contains the srcs.      | "my_rule"                          |
| thrift_library_srcs | The thrift source files that we want to generate Patch. | ["foo.thrift", "bar.thrift"]       |
| thrift_library_deps | The build rules that patch depends on.                  | ["//path/to/foo", "//path/to/bar"] |
| languages           | Same as the `languages` argument in thrift_library.     | ["cpp2", "python"]                 |

Any extra arguments will be forwarded to the internal Patch's thrift_library.

### Example

In TARGETS, for

```
thrift_library(
  name = "foo",
  languages = ['cpp2'],
  srcs = {"foo.thrift": []},
  deps = ["//path/to/bar"]
)
```

Add the following build rule to build patch target

```
thrift_patch_library(
  thrift_library_name = "foo",
  thrift_library_srcs = ["foo.thrift"],
  thrift_library_deps = ["//path/to/bar"],
  languages = ['cpp2'],
  thrift_cpp2_options = ['any'],
)
```

Internally, this will generate

```
thrift_library(
  name = "foo_patch",
  srcs = {"foo_patch.thrift": []},
  deps = [":foo", "//path/to/bar_patch"],
  languages = ['cpp2'],
  thrift_cpp2_options = ['any'],
)
```

So that this can be used later in C++

```
// MyService.cpp
#include "path/to/gen-cpp2/foo_patch_types.h"

auto createPatch() {
  apache::thrift::op::patch_type<Foo> patch;
  patch.patch<ident::message>() += "suffix";
  return patch;
}
```

Dependencies can be included automatically via autodeps.

### Dynamic Patch

There are 2 representations of a Patch — Static Patch and Dynamic Patch. Both
have identical wire format, though they have different requirements and provide
different APIs. In general, Static Patch is preferred unless you can not include
the generated thrift header.

- Static Patch, or Schema-full Patch, is generated from Thrift codegen and has
  1:1 mapping to Thrift type.
  - Pros: More user-friendly APIs (e.g., be able to modify patch based on field
    name, user can’t generate invalid patch).
  - Cons: Requires thrift file to be available (e.g.,
    `<thrift_file>_patch_types.h` must be included in C++).
    You need to recursively enable to all Thrift file dependencies.
- Dynamic Patch, or Schema-less Patch, is a schema-less representation of static
  patch that is consumed with dynamic type `protocol::Object`.
  - Pros: Can be used without thrift file.
  - Cons: Less user-friendly APIs.

### Deprecated workflow

There is also a deprecated workflow which you can enable Patch via
`@patch.GeneratePatch` annotation.

When this annotation is used, the corresponding Patch struct will be generated directly in the original thrift file.
This workflow is deprecated and it should not be used for new files.

## C++ Static Patch

### Struct Patch

Considering the following thrift struct.

```
// In thrift file
struct MyStruct {
  1: optional string field;
};
```

Then you can use `MyStructPatch` to access the underlying [StructPatch](../../../ref/cpp/class/apache/thrift/op/detail/StructPatch). e.g.,

```
// In C++ file
namespace op = apache::thrift::op;
namespace ident = apache::thrift::ident;

MyStruct s;
s.field() = "hi";

MyStructPatch patch;
op::StringPatch& stringPatch = patch.patch<ident::field>();
stringPatch.prepend("(");
stringPatch.append(")");
patch.apply(s);
EXPECT_EQ(s.field(), "(hi)");
```

Here `patch.patch<ident::field>()` is a [StringPatch](../../../ref/cpp/class/apache/thrift/op/detail/StringPatch). It’s worth noting that `patch` method will ensure the existence of the field. If field doesn’t exist, it will be set to intrinsic default first, e.g.,

```
s.clear();
patch.apply(s);
EXPECT_TRUE(s.field().has_value());
EXPECT_EQ(s.field(), "()");
```

If you don’t want to patch when the field doesn’t exist, you **should** use `patchIfSet` method instead.
Besides patching fields, you can also use `patch` to modify the whole struct. e.g.,

```
patch.clear();
patch.apply(s);
EXPECT_FALSE(s.field().has_value());
```

### Merge

All Patches have `merge` method, it’s guaranteed that the following code.

```
patch1.apply(v);
patch2.apply(v);
```

is equivalent to

```
patch1.merge(patch2);
patch1.apply(v);
```

### Patch as Thrift Struct

The Patch itself is a thrift struct that can be included in another thrift struct, e.g.

```
// In Foo.thrift
@patch.GeneratePatch
struct MyStruct {
  1: optional string field;
};

// In Patches.thrift
include "Foo.thrift"
struct Patches {
  1: Foo.MyStructPatch patch;
}
```

`Patches` works as a normal thrift structure which you can serialize/deserialize.

NOTE: Due to implementation limitation, you cannot include MyStructPatch in the same file — you have to include it in another file. In addition, you cannot use `@GeneratePatch` for struct that contains another Patch.

### Value Patches

Besides StringPatch, there are [other types of Patch](../../../cpp_api_toc). One example would be [MapPatch](../../../ref/cpp/class/apache/thrift/op/detail/MapPatch). Consider the following thrift struct.


```
// In thrift file
struct MyMapStruct {
  2: map<i64, string> nested;
};
```

You can patch elements by key, e.g.,

```
MyMapStructPatch patch;
auto &stringPatch = patch.patch<ident::nested>().patchByKey(42);
stringPatch.prepend("(");
stringPatch.append(")");

MyMapStruct s;
s.nested[42] = "hi";
patch.apply(s);
EXPECT_EQ(s.nested[42], "(hi)");
```

### Read patch's content

`Patch::customVisitor(Visitor)` can be used to inspect Patch. This API uses the Visitor pattern to describe how Patch is applied. For each operation that will be performed by the patch, the corresponding method (that matches the write API) will be invoked.

For example, let's assume you have the following thrift struct:

    struct MyClass {
      1: string foo;
      2: bool bar;
    }

and then you created the following patch:

    MyClassPatch patch;
    patch.patch<ident::bar>().invert();
    patch.patch<ident::bar>().invert();
    patch.patch<ident::foo>().append("_");

`patch.customVisit(v)` will invoke the following methods

    v.ensure<ident::foo>();
    v.ensure<ident::bar>();
    v.patchIfSet<ident::foo>(StringPatch::createAppend("_"));
    v.patchIfSet<ident::bar>(BoolPatch{});  // no-op since inverted twice

### Type alias for Patch type

You can get Patch type from original type, vice versa. e.g.,

```
static_assert(std::is_same_v<apache::thrift::op::patch_type<MyStruct>, MyStructPatch>);
static_assert(std::is_same_v<MyStruct, MyStructPatch::value_type>);
```

## C++ Dynamic Patch

If you can not include the generated thrift header, you can still serialize any abritrary patch to `protocol::Object` and apply it. Here is an example how to apply the dynamic patch:

```
MyStruct s;
s.field() = "hi";

MyStructPatch patch;
op::StringPatch& stringPatch = patch.patch<ident::field>();
stringPatch.prepend("(");
stringPatch.append(")");

protocol::Object dynamicStruct = apache::thrift::protocol::toObject(s);
protocol::Object dynamicPatch = apache::thrift::protocol::toObject(patch);
protocol::applyPatch(dynamicPatch, dynamicStruct);

EXPECT_EQ(dynamicStruct[FieldId{1}].as_string(), "(hi)");

```

You can find all dynamic patch APIs [here](../../../ref/cpp/file/thrift/lib/cpp2/protocol/Patch.h).
